docs: update app guideline security section (#214)
dhis2/developer-portal: blog/2026-03-09-app-hub-guidance-for-external-service-integrations/index.md

---
slug: 2026/03/app-hub-route-update
title: Updating App Hub Guidance for External Service Integrations
authors: [johan]
---

To ensure high quality of the apps on the App Hub, we have made updates to the App Hub security guidelines for apps that communicate with external services.
Apps that connect to external APIs must no longer handle third-party credentials in browser-accessible storage for direct client-side use. Instead, external-service communication should be performed through [DHIS2 Routes](https://docs.dhis2.org/en/develop/using-the-api/dhis-core-version-master/route.html) so that credentials and upstream authentication live on the server side, and access can be controlled through DHIS2 authorization and sharing.

This change is reflected in the updated [App Hub Submission Guidelines](/docs/guides/apphub-guidelines.md). The use of hard-coded secrets are discouraged, and server-side synchronization processes are strongly recommended rather than browser-based ones.

> We recommend that all app maintainers implement these new security updates by **mid-June 2026** (ahead of the [DHIS2 Annual Conference](https://dac2026.dhis2.org/)). After the annual conference, the DHIS2 Extensibility Team will review all of the apps on the App Hub, and remove all apps that do not follow the updated security guidelines.

Reviewer: (To do: check this timeline -- we may want to do this before the conference)

<!-- truncate -->

## The old pattern

> A common older pattern has been to store API tokens or similar configurations in the [DataStore](https://docs.dhis2.org/en/develop/using-the-api/dhis-core-version-master/data-store.html) or [UserDataStore](https://docs.dhis2.org/en/develop/using-the-api/dhis-core-version-master/data-store.html#webapi_user_data_store), read those values in the browser, and then send requests straight to the external service. Even when dataStore values are encrypted at rest, the core issue remains: if the browser can read a credential, the browser can expose said credential through network requests, logs or browser tooling. Here is what it looks like in code:

Reviewer: In prose, we can refer to it as the "data store" (with that capitalization)

```jsx
import { useDataQuery } from '@dhis2/app-runtime'

const NAMESPACE = 'my-app-config'
const KEY = 'externalService'

const query = {
    credentials: {
        resource: `userDataStore/${NAMESPACE}/${KEY}`,
    },
}

export const useExternalCredentials = () => {
    const { data, loading, error } = useDataQuery(query)

    return {
        credentials: data?.credentials,
        loading,
        error,
    }
}
```

### 3. The app calls the external API directly

With the credentials now available, the app authenticates against the external service and makes requests directly from the browser. In this example, we fetch event information from an external service:

```jsx
const { credentials } = useExternalCredentials()

const loginRes = await fetch(`${credentials.url}/api/users/login`, {
    method: 'POST',
    headers: { 'Content-Type': 'application/json' },
    body: JSON.stringify({
        username: credentials.username,
        password: credentials.password,
    }),
})

const session = await loginRes.json()

const result = await fetch(
    `${credentials.url}/api/events?access_token=${session.id}`
)

const events = await result.json()
```

> Even thought the the DataStore and UserDataStore may encrypt values at rest on the server (by setting the `?encrypt=true` [query string parameter](https://docs.dhis2.org/en/develop/using-the-api/dhis-core-version-master/data-store.html#webapi_data_store_create_values)), the browser recieves plaintext credentials to use them. From that point they are visible in the Javascript memory, network request payloads, console logs, and any XSS vulnerabiiy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even though the the data store and user data store may encrypt values at rest on the server (by setting the `?encrypt=true` [query string parameter](https://docs.dhis2.org/en/develop/using-the-api/dhis-core-version-master/data-store.html#webapi_data_store_create_values)), the browser receives plaintext credentials to use them. From that point they are visible in the Javascript memory, network request payloads, console logs, and any XSS vulnerabiiy.
```

This is done once, and van be done either through the [Route Manager App](https://docs.dhis2.org/en/use/user-guides/dhis-core-version-master/maintaining-the-system/route-manager.html) (available on the [App Hub](https://apps.dhis2.org/app/5dbe9ab8-46bd-411e-b22f-905f08a81d78)) or directly via the API:

```json
POST /api/routes
{
    "name": "External Service",
    "code": "external-service",
    "url": "https://external-service.example.com/api/**",
    "auth": {
        "type": "http-basic",
        "username": "admin",
        "password": "mySecretPassword"
    },
    "authorities": ["MY_APP_AUTHORITY"]
}
```

![Configuring a route through the Route Manager App](./route-manager-app-example.png)

A few things to note:

-   the `**` wildcard means sub-paths are passed through to the upstream service. More information can be found in the [routes documentation](https://docs.dhis2.org/en/develop/using-the-api/dhis-core-version-master/route.html#wildcard-routes)
-   The credentials are encrypted on the server and cannot be read back via the API
-   The `authorities` array lets users with that authorithy run the route without needing full route-management permissions.

> -   Severa [authentication modes](https://docs.dhis2.org/en/develop/using-the-api/dhis-core-version-master/route.html#running-a-route-with-authentication) are supported, like `http-basic`, `api-token` and `oauth2-client-credentials`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Several [authentication modes](https://docs.dhis2.org/en/develop/using-the-api/dhis-core-version-master/route.html#running-a-route-with-authentication) are supported, like `http-basic`, `api-token` and `oauth2-client-credentials`.
```
